# ID: selig_lowre_lecture
# SOURCE: https://m-selig.ae.illinois.edu/pubs/Selig-2003-VKI-LRN-Airfoil-Design-Lecture-Series.pdf
# ORIGINAL: reference/raw/selig_lowre_lecture.pdf
# CONVERTED: 2026-09-18 21:23 UTC-0500 | type pdf | 43 pages | ~30976 tokens
# NOTE: Selig 2003 VKI lecture: low-Re airfoil design principles (Clmax, transition, bubbles). Use first half
# FLAG img: pages 23-25,29,32-35,37,40-42

=== PAGE 1 ===
             Low Reynolds Number Airfoil Design

                                Lecture Notes

                                 Michael S. Selig∗

                      Department of Aerospace Engineering
                  University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
                           Urbana, Illinois 61801 USA

                               VKI Lecture Series

                                    Sponsored by
             NATO Research and Technology Organization (RTO)
                    Applied Vehicle Technology (AVT) Panel
                               24–28 November 2003

Abstract

An approach to low Reynolds number airfoil design is described, and several example design
cases are presented and discussed. The overall approach involves using the inverse method
PROFOIL for design and XFOIL for analysis. Validation of these methods and the low
Reynolds number airfoil design philosophy is supported by UIUC wind tunnel experiments.
These notes derive largely from four prior publications of the author (see Refs. 1–4) and the
contributions of the respective co-authors are gratefully acknowledged.

1    Introduction

For over 100 years, airfoil design has continued to capture the interest of practitioners of
applied aerodynamics. The field is fueled by the ever-growing combination of airfoil design
requirements for unique applications, such as UAVs, and this state of affairs is likely to
continue. When one considers all possible permutations of the myriad of airfoil design re-
quirements, it quickly becomes apparent that the number of unique sets of requirements far
  ∗Associate Professor, 306 Talbot Laboratory, 104 S. Wright St. email: m-selig@uiuc.edu.
   Presented at the von Karman Institute for Fluid Dynamics, Lecture Series: Low Reynolds Number
Aerodynamics on Aircraft including applications in Emerging UAV Technology, 24–28 November 2003.
   Copyright c⃝2003 by Michael S. Selig. Published by the von Karman Institute for Fluid Dynamics or
NATO-RTO/AVT, with permission.

                                           1

=== PAGE 2 ===
exceeds the collection of existing airfoils. For this reason, the advancement and use of meth-
ods for airfoil design continues to be the economical solution. In contrast, the enrichment of
airfoil “catalogs” for their own sake is felt to be of limited value.
   The objective of this lecture focuses on the design of airfoils for low Reynolds numbers,
which has been the subject of considerable research as documented in several major con-
ferences and books.5–9 First, various approaches to airfoil design are discussed, leading to
the use of inverse methods being favored over the alternatives. Second, several sections of
these notes outline the important influence of laminar separation bubbles on low Reynolds
number airfoils, leading to the need for an inverse method that has the unique capabilities
of being able to more or less directly control the movement of transition with angle of at-
tack. The desired behavior of transition forms the basis of a design philosophy that has been
implemented in a methodology for inverse airfoil design. Finally, to illustrate the overall
approach to low Reynolds number airfoil design, several example airfoils are presented in
this lecture. In each case, state-of-the-art tools for airfoil design10,11 and analysis12–14 were
used. Although these airfoils were each designed for specific applications, the systematic
and parametric studies show useful performance trends and trade-offs in airfoil design at low
Reynolds numbers. As will be shown, the overall design process has been validated through
wind tunnel tests, and these results are presented together with the predictions.

2    Various Approaches to Airfoil Design

In this section, various approaches to airfoil design are briefly summarized. The alternative
to our great legacy of airfoil design by geometric means guided by empirical study (Fig. 1a) is
to use an inverse method, and there are certain advantages to be had by adopting the latter
while realizing that often geometric constraints must still be achieved. By adopting an inverse
approach, the degree to which the aerodynamic performance can be controlled has reached
a high level of sophistication. Inverse design in the classic sense involves specifying a desired
velocity distribution (Fig. 1b) based on boundary-layer and consequently performance con-
siderations. Taking this one step further by directly prescribing the desired boundary-layer
characteristics (Fig. 1c) is a step closer to controlling the desired outcome—the performance.
Thus, employing an inverse boundary-layer-like approach can give the designer tremendous
power in achieving the performance goals in the face of all the trade-offs that one must
consider in the process of airfoil design. Continuing the sequence in going from geometry
based methods to inverse methods, the final step is one wherein the performance is speci-
fied using an optimization scheme (Fig. 1d), but implementation of an efficient optimization
method has met with limited success relative to the other approaches. Nevertheless, each
of these four approaches to design have their respective strengths of allowing more or less
direct control over particular characteristics of airfoils. Each of these characteristics could
be considered as a design variable (Fig. 1d) that ideally should be incorporated into a single
design methodology.
   Apart from the design variables of choice, a second consideration involves having the
ability to control the performance over multiple operating points. Figure 3 illustrates this
concept. Typically, airfoil design requirements include information regarding Cl,max (point
C in the figure) as well as the operating range over which low drag is achieved (points A

                                           2

=== PAGE 3 ===
to B). These requirements can be translated into specific characteristics to be embodied in
the pressure distribution. For instance, low drag at points A and B requires extended runs
of laminar flow on the lower and upper surfaces, respectively, while the high lift require-
ment is achieved by limiting the leading edge suction peak behavior, each of which must be
achieved at the corresponding design lift coefficient. Collectively this approach is referred to
as multipoint design, which is clearly a desired feature of any airfoil design method.

3    Laminar Separation Bubbles and Transition

Low Reynolds number airfoil flows are principally distinguished by their associated laminar
separation bubbles such as that depicted in Fig. 4. In past research, considerable attention
has been focused on laminar separation bubbles because they are the leading culprit to the
degradation in performance relative to airfoils at higher Reynolds numbers. When laminar
separation bubbles do appear, they are caused by the inabilty of the flow to make a transition
to turbulent flow in the attached boundary layer on the surface of the airfoil. Instead, the
laminar flow separates before transition. When this happens, transition occurs in the free
shear layer, and the so-called laminar separation bubble is formed when the turbulent flow
reattaches to the airfoil surface downstream of transition. For the most part, the resulting
pressure drag over the region of the laminar separation bubble is responsible for the relatively
high drag that can sometimes accompany airfoils at low Reynolds numbers. The existence
of a laminar separation bubble and its extents can be deduced by examining surface oil flow
visualization as will be discussed later in these notes.
   As shown by Drela,15 the drag contribution owning to a bubble can be approximated by
considering the integral boundary layer equation

                             dθ             θ due
                                = −(2 + H)        + 2 Cf
                             dξ             ue dξ
from which the drag coefficient can be determined using

                                        2(θus + θls)
                                   Cd =
                                             c
For the special purpose here of considering the drag due to a laminar separation bubble, it
is more helpful to express the integral boundary layer equation as

                               1 d(ρu2 eθ)   Cf −H due
                                          =
                             ρu2 eθ  dξ      2 θ  ue dξ
Inside the laminar separation bubble, the skin friction is nearly zero and hence it can be
assumed that Cf ≃0. In this case the integral boundary layer equation becomes

                                  ∆ρu2 eθ      ∆ue
                                         ≃−H
                                   ρu2 eθ       ue
or

                                 ∆ρu2 eθ ≃−ρueδ∗∆ue

                                          3

=== PAGE 4 ===
   Thus, the drag increment due to a laminar separation bubble is proportional to the
product of the average mass defect ρueδ∗and drop in the edge velocity ∆ue. A graphical
interpretation of this result is shown in Fig. 5. Three edge velocity distributions are shown
together with the drag increment that grows downstream. For case 1, transition is assumed
to have occurred on the airfoil surface without the mechanism of a laminar separation bubble.
Prior to transition, the drag increases slowly, while downstream of transition the growth is
more rapid and consistent with a turbulent boundary layer. For case 2, laminar separation
is shown to have occurred as indicated by the plateau in the velocity distribution, which
is accompanied by no growth in the drag increment until transition occurs. At transition
and subsequent reattachment, there is a jump in the drag that continues to grow consistent
with the turbulent boundary layer behavior. For case 3, a longer laminar separation bubble
is considered. In this case, the larger drop in the edge velocity at transition gives rise to
a correspondingly larger jump in the drag increment as compared with case 2. Clearly,
between the two limiting cases of transition without a bubble (case 1) and transition at the
end of a long bubble (case 3), there is an optimum where the bubble drag increment can
be minimized. For most airfoils, this minimum case in relation to the total airfoil drag is
associated with a thin laminar separation bubble that has only a small drop in the edge
velocity at transition.
   From this discussion in connection with Fig. 5 that shows the drag increment through a
bubble, the location of transition dictates the size of the bubble and with it the drag of the
bubble. Thus, an airfoil designer focuses on the questions: where is transition, where should
it be, and how can it be controlled? Taken together answers to these questions should yield
more knowledge of airfoil flows and help in the development of a design philosophy. As a
step in this direction, the following section outlines an approach to finding the transition
location, which is the first step in low Reynolds number airfoil design.

4    Finding Transition

As will be seen, having knowledge of the transition location is key to the development of
the low Reynolds number airfoil design philosophy presented later. In what follows, two
tools for determining transition are discussed—first through experiments and then through
predictions.

4.1   Tool #1: Wind Tunnel Tests

All experiments were conducted in the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign (UIUC)
subsonic wind tunnel (Fig. 6), which has a nominal test section that is 2.81-ft high and 4-ft
wide. The test set-up depicted in Figs. 7 and 8 was used for this study.16,17 As seen in Fig. 7,
two 6-ft long Plexiglas splitter plates are inserted 2.8 ft apart into the test section to isolate
the airfoil models from both the support hardware and the tunnel side wall boundary layers.
The 1-ft chord airfoil models were inserted horizontally between the splitter plates with
nominal gaps of 0.040–0.080 in. between the end of the airfoil model and the splitter plates.
Performance data were taken at Reynolds numbers of 100,000, 200,000, 350,000 and 500,000.
The lift was measured using a strain gauge load cell, and the drag was determined using

                                          4

=== PAGE 5 ===
the momentum deficit method.16 To account for spanwise drag variations at low Reynolds
numbers,18 the drag was obtained from an average of eight equidistant wake surveys over the
center of the model so that a 10.5-in. wide span was covered. The overall uncertainty in both
the lift and drag measurements was estimated at 1.5%.16,17 All lift and drag measurements
were corrected for wind tunnel interference and validated with data from the NASA Langley
Low Turbulence Pressure Tunnel.4,16,18–20
   As has been well documented, low Reynolds number airfoil flows are highly sensitive to
the tunnel flow quality. Consequently, tunnel flow quality measurements were taken and
documented in detail in Refs. 4 and 21. Only a subset of those results, in particular the
turbulence intensity measurements, are included in these lecture notes. The turbulence
intensity was measured using hot-wire anemometry. Specifically, the hot-wire system was
a TSI Incorporated IFA 100 anemometer in conjunction with a TSI Model 1210-T1.5 hot-
wire probe. The probe makes use of a 1.5-micron platinum-coated tungsten wire. The
probe was mounted in the tunnel end-flow orientation with the wire perpendicular to the
tunnel floor in order to measure the axial turbulence intensity. A PC equipped with a data
acquisition card was used to log the signal from the anemometer. A HP 35665A Dynamic
Signal Analyzer, which performed a FFT (Fast Fourier Transform) analysis, was employed
to allow the turbulence spectrum to be monitored over a broad range of frequencies. More
details of the method are given in Ref. 21.
   The turbulence intensity was calculated from data using a total of 50,000 samples with a
sample frequency of 10,000 Hz. Figure 9 shows the resulting turbulence levels for both the
tunnel empty case and with the full measurement apparatus installed. In general these levels
are considered to be sufficiently low for taking low Reynolds number airfoil measurements.
   The surface oil flow visualization technique made use of a fluorescent pigment (Kent-
Moore 28431-1) suspended in a light, household-grade mineral oil that was sprayed onto the
surface of the model using a Paasche Model VL double-action airbrush. The model was
then subjected to 20–45 min of continuous wind-tunnel run time at a fixed Reynolds number
and angle of attack. During this period, the oil moved in the direction of the local flow
velocity at a rate dependent on the balance of forces dictated by the boundary-layer skin
friction coefficient Cf and surface tension of the oil. As a result, regions of the flow could be
identified and compared with the NASA Langley Low-Turbulence Pressure Tunnel (LTPT)
data.19,20
   Figure 10 shows a photograph of the surface oil flow pattern made visible under fluo-
rescent light. Figure 11 conceptually illustrates the connection between the salient surface
oil flow features and the skin friction distribution. Note that the skin friction distribution,
though conceptual, is consistent with the results of many computational studies.22–27 The
authors believe that the unique shape of the Cf distribution, in particular the strong negative
Cf spike, has yet to be experimentally verified (as no experimental data could be found);
however, the oil flow patterns observed seem to confirm the validity of the negative Cf spike
concept.
   Several important flow features can be identified and related to the underlying skin
friction and surface tension forces. In Fig. 10, laminar flow is seen to exist from the leading
edge to approximately 0.40c. The oil streaks are characteristically smooth in this region
until laminar separation occurs, which is identified in Fig. 11 as the point where Cf = 0.
(Note again that the flow shown in Fig. 11 is conceptual, and it is not intended to match

                                          5

=== PAGE 6 ===
Fig. 10 in detail.) Downstream of the point of laminar separation, the original airbrushed
“orange-peel” texture that existed prior to running the tunnel still exists, indicating that
the flow is stagnant in this region. This stagnant flow is consistent with the known behavior
of flow in the interior leading-edge region of a laminar separation bubble. As sketched, the
Cf magnitude in this region is quite small due to the low flow speed and negative in sign
due to reverse flow at the surface.
   In the presence of a laminar separation bubble, transition takes place in the free shear
layer above the surface of the airfoil. Downstream of this point, reattachment occurs in a
process that is known to be unsteady as vortices are periodically generated and impinge on
the airfoil surface.27,28 These unsteady vortices colliding with the surface lead to a relatively
high shear stress that tends to scour away the oil at the mean reattachment point, pushing
oil upstream or downstream of the reattachment point. As seen in Fig. 11, the reattachment
line is less distinct because the bulk of the oil has been pushed away revealing the underlying
black airfoil surface. In Fig. 10, the tunnel run time was long enough that the reattachment
line at 0.58c is even harder to see than in Fig. 11. In the original high-resolution color
photographs that were archived, this feature is clear and easily quantifiable.
   Downstream of reattachment the boundary layer is turbulent. The high skin friction in
this area relative to the laminar boundary layer upstream tends to clear away more oil, again
making the black surface downstream more visible than in the upstream region.
   The remaining visible feature of the flow is a line where the oil tends to pool, termed here
the “oil accumulation line.” This intrinsic feature of the oil flow has no direct connection to
laminar flow, reverse flow in the bubble, or the ensuing turbulent flow downstream. However,
it does indicate a relatively important feature of the flow with regard to the nature of the
skin friction in the vicinity of reattachment. The negative Cf spike shown in predictions and
sketched conceptually in Fig. 11 is most likely responsible for generating the oil accumulation
line. Assuming that this is the case, the fluctuating high skin friction that is generated over
the unsteady reattachment zone will tend to push the oil upstream ahead of the mean
reattachment point. At some location on the airfoil, however, the oil moving upstream will
experience a balance of forces between the rapidly weakening skin friction force and that of
the surface tension and oil adhesion that is retarding its motion. At the location where these
two forces balance, the oil accumulates into a line that becomes the most distinguishable
feature of the oil flow. Consequently, it is speculated that this flow feature is sometimes
mislabeled as “reattachment” as will be discussed below.

4.2   Tool #2: XFOIL Predictions

In the data presented here, XFOIL14 has been used as a post-design viscous/inviscid analysis
tool. A linear-vorticity second-order accurate panel method is used for inviscid analysis in
XFOIL. This panel method is coupled with an integral boundary-layer method and an en-
type transition amplification formulation using a global Newton method to compute the
inviscid/viscous coupling, requiring less than a minute of elapse time per polar on modern
desktop computers. For the current work ncrit was set to the default value of 9, which
is typical for a smooth wing surface in a low-turbulence environment. Each airfoil was
represented in XFOIL using 230 panels distributed using XFOIL’s default paneling routine.
XFOIL has proven to be well suited for the analysis of subcritical airfoils even in the presence

                                           6

=== PAGE 7 ===
of significant laminar separation bubbles.

4.3   Results

XFOIL was used to predict the viscous pressure distributions on the E387 airfoil as shown
in Figs. 12a–c. The characteristic pressure distribution caused by the presence of a laminar
separation bubble is clearly seen. Oil flow visualization was performed to document the
locations of the major surface flow features as presented in Figs. 13, 14, 15, and 16. These
results were then compared with benchmark data and also XFOIL predictions.
   Figures 17 and 18 show the previously described flow features compared with benchmark
data obtained at the NASA Langley LTPT. In the low drag range between −2 deg and 7 deg
angle of attack, the agreement in the laminar separation line between the NASA LTPT and
UIUC data sets is mostly within 0.01c to 0.02c, which is very near the uncertainty of the
method. As previously discussed, the next feature to appear is the oil accumulation line.
The UIUC oil accumulation line agrees fairly well with the “reattachment” line identified in
the NASA experiment. It is believed, however, that based on the previous reasoning this
label given in the original reference20 is a misnomer. Had the UIUC tests been performed
for a longer duration, the reattachment zone would be scoured clean with no remaining
distinguishing feature, leaving only the oil accumulation line to be labeled as the “reattach-
ment line,” knowing that one must exist. Hence, it is speculated here and in prior UIUC
work17 that such a scenario took place in the NASA study, i.e. the oil-accumulation line was
misinterpreted as the reattachment line.
   Guided by this working assumption, the two results again are in good agreement. It must
be stated, however, that the oil accumulation line might change slightly from one facility to
the next since it is dictated by a force balance that depends on the skin friction forces of the
boundary layer relative to the adhesion forces of the particular oil used. The predictions,
however, show that the negative Cf region has a sharp upstream edge, which is most likely
where the oil accumulates regardless of the surface tension characteristics. Differences in
the oil accumulation line due to differences in the type of oil used are therefore believed
to be small. The good comparisons between UIUC and Langley data tend to support this
assumption.
   Moving further downstream, the UIUC reattachment data is plotted, but unfortunately
no direct comparison can be made because of the ambiguity with respect to the reattachment
data reported in the NASA study. However, close inspection of the data suggests that at a
Reynolds number of 300,000 and between 5 and 7 deg angle of attack, the LTPT line merges
with the UIUC reattachment line. Perhaps in this case, the measurements at Langley were
indeed the reattachment points.
   The conclusion to be drawn from this comparison of the oil flow visualization results
is that the two facilities produce airfoil flows that are in close agreement. Moreover, if
the arguments regarding the oil accumulation line are correct, then the agreement can be
considered excellent and within the uncertainty of the measurements.
   To make comparisons with predictions, the upper-surface flow features for each airfoil
were computed at Reynolds numbers of 200,000, 350,000, and 500,000 and at angles of attack
from −2 to 18 deg using XFOIL14 (version 6.94, http://raphael.mit.edu/xfoil/). These data
were then used to determine the point of laminar separation and reattachment, which are

                                          7

=== PAGE 8 ===
both defined by Cf = 0 as illustrated in Fig. 11. A comparison between these predictions and
experimental measurements are shown in Figs. 19, 20, and 21. The agreement is quite good,
and this lends confidence to using XFOIL as an integral tool for analysis of low Reynolds
number airfoils.

5    Design Philosophy

As was discussed in Section 3, the performance of low Reynolds number airfoils is strongly
dependent on the location of transition as that sets the length of the laminar separation
bubble and consequently the magnitude of the drag rise attributable to the bubble. Thus,
controlling transition is a key step towards mitigating the adverse effects of laminar separa-
tion bubbles on low Reynolds number airfoils.
   One common approach to controlling transition, in particular, promoting transition, is
to employ an instability region in the pressure gradient or, as it is commonly called, a
transition ramp. A general discussion of transition ramps can be found in Refs. 13 and 29,
and additional details specific to low Reynolds number airfoils are discussed in Refs. 15, 30,
31, and 32. Figure. 22 shows a concept sketch of a transition ramp on the upper surface
velocity distribution. A ramp can be used on either surface of the airfoil, but in these lecture
notes attention will be focused on the upper surface. A second approach is to use a turbulator
or trip on the airfoil surface, such a zigzag trip like that shown in Fig. 23. Various types of
boundary layer trips have been used in the past, but for greatest efficiency three-dimensional
trips are believed to be more effective.33 The remainder of these lecture notes is concerned
with the former approach to promoting transition—that of using a transition ramp.
   Of critical importance in the design of low Reynolds number airfoils is the upper surface
pressure distribution. The tendency of the flow to form a laminar separation bubble can
lead to a significant degradation in performance owing to the high bubble drag. To mitigate
these adverse effects, a transition ramp in the pressure distribution is often employed to
gradually bring the flow to transition in a thin bubble without a large pressure rise and high
drag associated with an otherwise thick bubble.
   Illustrating a transition ramp by means of showing the pressure distribution (Fig. 22) is
instructive, but the essence of a transition ramp can be more precisely defined by examining
the movement of transition with angle of attack. Figure 24 shows a concept sketch of a polar
and in relation to this the transition locations on both surfaces of the airfoil. As can be seen,
over the low drag range, transition on the upper surface is in the vicinity of the midchord of
the airfoil. As the angle of attack is increased, transition moves forward as the upper surface
pressure gradient becomes more adverse. In these notes, the transition ramp as indicated in
Fig. 24 will be defined as the chordwise extent over which transition moves while the airfoil
operates in the low drag range of the polar.
   Given this approach to defining a transition ramp, consider the Wortmann FX 63-137
airfoil shown in Fig. 25 together with its inviscid pressure distribution. As can be seen, on
the upper surface there is a gradual adverse pressure gradient that will promote transition
as has been described. Figure 26 shows the measured locations of the major flow features
with angle of attack, and in this form the extents of the ramp are more clearly defined. As
can be deduced from the figure, transition (which occurs near the point of reattachment)

                                           8

=== PAGE 9 ===
moves from nearly 80% of chord at low angles of attack to near 20% of chord at an angle of
attack of near ≃10 deg. The corresponding performance is shown in Fig. 27. The low drag
range of the polar extends from Cl = 0.5 to Cl ≃1.6 which correspond to angles of attack
of −2 deg to ≃10 deg, respectively.
   In contrast to the FX 63-137 airfoil, which was designed for low Reynolds numbers,
the high Reynolds number design NASA NLF(1)-0414F airfoil was also examined. At high
Reynolds numbers, the need for a relatively long transition ramp is diminished. Thus,
the pressure recovery region can occur rather abruptly so long as transition occurs before
recovery. For this reason, a relatively short transition ramp is often employed. On the
NASA NLF(1)-0414F airfoil this ramp occurs at ≃70% chord on the upper surface (see
Fig. 28). At low Reynolds numbers with a steep pressure recovery occurring this far aft,
a long bubble can be expected to occur. Indeed as shown in Fig. 29 laminar separation
occurs relatively far aft, and at the lowest Reynolds number of 200,000 reattachment does
not occur. For the two higher Reynolds numbers of 350,000 and 500,000, reattachment does
occur on the airfoil. However, the resulting long bubble leads to a significant degradation in
performance as show in Fig. 30.
   The contrast between the FX 63-137 and NASA NLF(1)-0414F airfoils illustrates large
performance differences resulting from correspondingly large differences in their respective
transition ramps. Even small changes in the shape of the transition ramp, however, can have
important effects on performance as follows.
   The effect of subtle changes in the transition ramp is demonstrated using two example
airfoils A and B. Figure 31 shows a comparison of the geometries and inviscid velocity
distributions. These airfoils were designed to each have a different transition ramp that is
reflected in a different shape for the transition curve (Cl-xtr/c curve) on the upper surface.
The two airfoils were analyzed using XFOIL, and Fig. 32 shows the drag polars and upper-
surface transition curves for a Reynolds number of 200,000. As was mentioned, the transition
ramp is defined here as the region over which the bubble moves gradually as defined by the
transition curve. (In this context, the transition ramp might be more aptly called a “bubble
ramp.”31)
   From Fig. 32, it can be seen that airfoil A has lower drag than airfoil B at lift coefficients
from around 0.3 to around 0.7, above which value airfoil B has lower drag. Also noticeable is
the correlation between the drag polar and the shape of the upper-surface transition curve.
For the Cl-range from 0.3–0.7, where airfoil A has lower drag, the transition curve for airfoil A
is shallower than for airfoil B; that is, there is a larger change in the value of xtr/c for airfoil A
than for B. For values of Cl from 0.7–1.2 where airfoil B has lower drag, the transition curve
for airfoil B is shallower than for A. This figure shows that the steepness of the transition
curve is a direct indication of the bubble drag. By adjusting the shape of this curve, it is
therefore possible to tailor the drag polar of an airfoil at low Reynolds numbers.
   Figure 32 also includes an overlay of the variation of bubble size (xr −xs) with Cl. The
size of the bubble for each Cl was obtained by determining the chordwise extent over which
the skin-friction Cf, as predicted by XFOIL, was less than or equal to zero. Studying the
bubble-size variation for the two airfoils further illustrates the connection between the shape
of the transition curve and the bubble drag. The bubble is larger when the transition curve
is steeper.
   Figure 33 shows the inviscid velocity distributions for airfoil A at Cl values of 0.5 and 1.0

                                          9

=== PAGE 10 ===
with the upper-surface bubble location marked in bold. A similar plot for airfoil B is shown
in Fig. 34. Comparing the velocity drops across the bubble for the four cases, it can be seen
that while airfoil A has a smaller velocity drop than airfoil B at Cl = 0.5, the situation is
reversed for Cl = 1.0. Since the pressure drag due to the bubble increases with increasing
velocity drop across the bubble, airfoil A has smaller bubble drag at the low Cl and larger
bubble drag at the higher Cl. Thus, a steeper transition curve results in a larger bubble and
also a larger velocity drop across the bubble causing an increase in bubble drag.
   The connection between the transition ramp as defined by the Cl-xtr/c transition curve
and the resulting performance forms the basis of the present low Reynolds number airfoil
design philosophy. The philosophy is to prescribed the Cl-xtr/c transition curve realizing
that at most it can extend from the trailing edge to the leading edge. Between these two
points (or simply the extent of the ramp) the airfoil performance can be further controlled by
prescribing the slope of the curve—the shallower the slope, the lower the drag, and vice versa.
There are however tradeoffs that must be addressed as was illustrated in the prior example.
The next step involves the implementation of this philosophy into a design methodology.

6    Methodology

In this section, the philosophy of prescribing the Cl-xtr/c transition curve (which in effect
is the transition ramp) is conveniently implemented in the inverse design code PROFOIL.
First, however, general background on the method and its capabilities are presented, and
following this its use in low Reynolds number airfoil design is described.
   The PROFOIL code10,11 embodies an inverse airfoil design method and an integral
boundary-layer method for rapid analysis at the design points. The method draws on the
pioneering work of Eppler12,13,34,35 in inverse airfoil design and analysis through conformal
mapping (outlined in Figs. 35, 36 and 37) and integral boundary-layer techniques, respec-
tively. PROFOIL differs from the Eppler code in that laminar and turbulent boundary-layer
developments can be directly prescribed through iteration on the velocity distribution. The
method also allows for control over certain geometric constraints, such as the local geome-
try, maximum thickness, thickness distribution, etc. Additional differences are discussed in
Refs. 10, 11, and 36. Both the boundary-layer and thickness-constraint capabilities are used
in the examples presented in these lecture notes. A web-based version of PROFOIL and
further discussion is available on the web.37
   The general capabilities of PROFOIL are illustrated in Figs. 38, 39, and 40. In Fig. 38,
three segments of an airfoil (to be designed) are specified to include a velocity distribution,
n-development (as used in the en method for transition prediction), and H12 development,
each to be achieved at different conditions. It should be noted that this is merely an example
and is not intended to be use for any practical application. Figure 39 shows the solution
that includes the relevant characteristics as prescribed, while Fig. 40 shows the final airfoil
shape.
   For the low Reynolds number airfoil design problem, the design variable of choice is not
the geometry nor the velocity, but instead it is the Cl-xtr/c transition curve as illustrated in
Figs. 31–34. In coping with this problem of in effect prescribing the Cl-xtr/c transition curve,
a useful approach derives from an inherent feature of the Eppler theory for inverse airfoil

                                          10

=== PAGE 11 ===
design. Briefly, in the Eppler method, the designer can specify for a segment of the airfoil
a design angle attack α∗(relative to the zero-lift line) over which the velocity is constant.
For instance, the forward upper surface can be defined as one segment and given a design
angle of attack of 10 deg (Cl = 2παz ≃1). When the resulting airfoil is then operated at
10 deg with respect to the zero-lift angle of attack αzl, the velocity over that segment is then
constant. For a higher angle of attack, the resulting pressure gradient is adverse and vice
versa. Further discussion can be found in Refs. 13 and 38.
   Because (1) the boundary layer responds to the pressure gradient, (2) the design angle
of attack α∗for a segment has a direct effect on the pressure gradient, and (3) many such
segments can be used to define an airfoil, these three aspects can be connected to yield an
elegant solution to having precise control over the Cl-xtr/c transition curve. Figure 41 shows
the velocity distributions for the SA7035 airfoil at several design angles of attack. As seen,
for segments 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 the design angles of attack α∗are 1.59, 3.34, 5.07, 6.63,
7.41, and 8.21 deg, respectively. When the airfoil operates at these values of αz, the velocity
gradient over the respective segments is zero as shown in the exploded portion of the figure.
   When these design angles of attack α∗are plotted vs. the segment-endpoint arc limits φ
used in the conformal mapping to generate the airfoil, the resulting curves shown in Fig. 42
mimic the corresponding transition curves over the respective surface of the airfoil, thereby
providing a means of controlling the transition ramp and resulting drag as was done also
with the example of Figs. 31 and 32. For the SA703x series, the α∗-φ curve shown in Fig. 42
maps from leading edge back to segment-endpoint 1 or approximately 75% of the chord
(see Fig. 41). It is over this region that the ramp is controlled by the α∗-φ curve, with the
remainder being controlled by the final trailing edge pressure recovery seen in Fig. 41. The
essence of this technique has been employed in the design of most of the S*xxxx four-digit
airfoils reported in the literature and archived in Refs. 16, 17, 31, 37, 39, and 40.
   The PROFOIL code, which is written in Fortran, has been integrated with a graphical
user interface (GUI) using Matlab. This GUI code, given the name MFOIL, allows the
user to interactively modify the α∗-φ curve and view the resulting changes in the airfoil and
corresponding velocity distributions. Sample screen grabs of the code are show in Figs. 43
and Fig. 44.
   The remainder of these notes are devoted to applications of the methodology.

7    SD7003 and SD2030 Airfoil for F3B Model Sailplanes

This first example airfoil, the SD7003, was designed in 1989 and documented in Ref. 31.
Originally it was intended for F3B R/C soaring competition, and at the time of its design its
overall drag characteristics were predicted and measured to be the lowest of several competing
sections. Figure 45 shows the airfoil and inviscid velocity distributions while Fig. 46 shows
the α∗-φ curve.
   What distinguishes this airfoil from many others is the rather long and quite shallow
transition ramp as seen in Figs. 47, 48, and 49 and as is consistent with the shape of the
α∗-φ curve. In fact, the upper surface transition ramp extends along the entire length of
the airfoil. The shallow ramp yields a thin bubble and consequently little associated bubble
drag as can be deduced from the polars shown in Fig. 50. Several attempts were made to

                                          11

=== PAGE 12 ===
reduce the drag through the use of turbulators, but they either increased the drag or had
no effect as documented in Ref. 31. This fact is further evidence that the bubble drag is
quite small for this section. Another interesting observation is that as compared with the
E387 (and several other airfoils) the oil flow on the surface of the SD7003 was more smeared
without the high degree of flow feature definition seen in Fig. 10.
   During this exploratory period in 1989 when there was generally less known about low
Reynolds number airfoils, a second F3B airfoil, the SD2030 shown in Fig. 51, was designed
for higher Reynolds number operation with the use of camber changing flaps. The design
philosophy was opposite that of the SD7003 in that the bubble ramp was rather short and
positioned far aft on the airfoil. Although the α∗-φ curve is not shown, it mirrors the
shape of the Cl-xtr/c transition curve that is shown together with the polar in Fig. 52. As
compared with the SD7003, the ramp on the SD2030 is steeper and occurs further aft on
the airfoil. From this information alone, one would expect the drag to be higher at the
lower Reynolds numbers, and this is indeed the case as seen in the predictions (Fig. 52) and
measured performance shown Fig. 53. For Re = 500,000, however, the extended runs of
laminar flow give rise to lower drag than the SD7003, which was one of the original design
goals. (It is worth noting the generally good agreement between the XFOIL predictions
and experiment, particularly at a Reynolds number of 200,000. The model in this case was
accurate to 0.006 inch for the 12-inch chord model that was tested.4 In comparison, the
SD7003 was accurate to 0.004 inch.31)

8    SG604x Series for Small Wind Turbines

The SG604x series of airfoils41 as shown in Fig. 55 was designed for small variable-speed
horizontal-axis wind turbines having a rated-power of 1–5 kW. The operational Reynolds
number for such machines is typically below 1,000,000. The focus here will be on the per-
formance at a Reynolds number of 300,000, which represents rotors on the lower end of the
range. In ideal conditions, variable speed wind turbines operate at a constant tip speed ratio
(ΩR/V∞), which leads to the airfoil operating at a single angle of attack over a wide range
of wind speeds. As a result, for optimum aerodynamic performance during variable-speed
operation, the low-drag lift range (drag bucket) can be reduced in favor of having greater
lift-to-drag ratios. However, to account for possible variations in the tip-speed-ratio caused
by atmospheric turbulence and operational considerations, the best lift-to-drag ratio condi-
tions should occur over a range of lift coefficients centered about the design lift coefficient.
In rotor design, another factor deals with the trade-offbetween the blade solidity and the
design lift coefficient. With all else being equal, a high-solidity rotor requires an airfoil with
lower lift than that required for a low-solidity rotor. Therefore, given the range of rotor
designs, a family of airfoils that cover a range of lift coefficients is desirable. These gen-
eral considerations and others were taken into account in setting the design requirements as
detailed more thoroughly in Ref. 41. The current discussion is mainly concerned with the
details of the design approach.
   PROFOIL was used to prescribe the desired aerodynamic characteristics. In a manner
similar to that used in the previously discussed SD7003 and SD2030 airfoils, the α∗-φ curve
was prescribed to define the desired shape of the Cl-xtr/c transition curve. Since the objective

                                          12

=== PAGE 13 ===
was to achieve a high lift-to-drag ratio with less emphasis being given to operation over a wide
range, the ramp on the upper surface was made to be rather shallow at the specific design lift
coefficients of 0.6, 0.9 and 1.2 for the SG6041, SG6042, and SG6043, respectively. Additional
constraints included the pitching moment, which increased with the design lift coefficient and
also the airfoil thickness of 10%. It should be added that for ease of construction a finite
trailing-edge angle was used, producing a zero trailing-edge velocity as seen in Fig. 55.
   Performance predictions at a Reynolds number of 300,000 are shown in Fig. 56 and
compare relatively well with the experimental results of Fig. 57. Most importantly, the
trends in the predictions agree well with experiment, and also the behavior of the α∗-φ curve
is reflected in the transition curve (Fig. 56).
   Figure 58 shows the resulting experimentally-determined lift-to-drag ratios at a Reynolds
number of 300,000 as compared with those for many previously existing airfoils. The SG6040
shown in the figure is the thicker companion root airfoil for the series of tip airfoils discussed
here. Clearly, the objective of achieving high lift-to-drag ratios has been achieved. Given the
high level of performance, these airfoils will likely find their way into applications beyond
wind energy.

9    S607x Series Designed for Low Pitching Moment

The S607x series is composed of three series of three airfoils each. The effort finally lead
to an airfoil for its intended application that required a low pitching moment and optimum
performance at a Reynolds number of 150,000 and lift coefficient near 1. Only data for
a Reynolds number of 200,000 is presented here, however. The series evolved from a 9%-
thick family to 12%, and then permutations in the pitching moment were made while other
improvements were incorporated. In these lecture notes only the second two series are
discussed.
   For the second series (S6074/5/6), the study centered on the upper-surface transition
ramp. Figure 59 shows the small changes in the α∗-φ curve to optimize the transition ramp
so as to achieve optimum performance near Cl ≃1. These differences result in small changes
to the resulting velocity distributions shown in Fig. 60. As seen, the shallower α∗-φ curve
for airfoil S6076 results in a shallower pressure gradient over the forward upper surface. The
differences in the airfoil shapes are so minute that a magnification of the y-axis is needed to
highlight the differences. These small changes to the ramp, however, do have a significant
effect on the bubble as may be deduced from the wind-tunnel tests results depicted in Fig. 61.
   Unfortunately, this series exhibited undesirable hysteresis as seen in the lift and moment
curves shown in Fig. 62. The occurance of hysteresis sometimes found at low Reynolds
numbers (as in this case) cannot be predicted by any computational method. However,
should hysteresis arise, an attempt can be made to reduce the amount of hysteresis or
eliminate it entirely. The first steps toward this remedy requires some understanding of the
flow phenomenon.
   Figure 63 shows two types of hysteresis that sometimes appear on low Reynolds number
airfoils. The flow states corresponding to points A and B on opposite branches of the
hysteresis loops is sketched in Fig. 64. For case A, a short laminar separation bubble exists
on the upper surface near the leading edge. Downstream of this point the flow is mostly

                                          13

=== PAGE 14 ===
attached, but some trailing edge separation (not sketched) may exist. For case B, the flow is
in a stalled state, and laminar flow extends to the point of separation, which occurs near the
midchord or even closer to the leading edge. As shown both of these flow states are possible
at the same angle of attack (as indicated in Fig.63), and hence there is hysteresis.
   What separates and distinguishes the two cases shown in Fig. 63 is the order in which
flow states A and B occur. For the clockwise hysteresis loop, when the angle of attack is
decreasing out of stall on the lower branch, the flow is first massively separated. Then at
a certain point, a small bubble is formed and the lift jumps to the upper branch. For the
counter clockwise loop, the opposite situation occurs. First, a small bubble resides near
the leading edge, and then it bursts and jumps to the lower branch where there is massive
separation. When the angle of attack is increased from the normally attached flow condition,
the description follows along similar lines except the flow states are reversed.
   For the current series, the clockwise hysteresis loop is present. Its elimination depends on
a short bubble attaching to the leading edge as the airfoil comes out of stall with decreasing
angle of attack. To promote the formation of this bubble, one strategy involves making
the leading edge suction peak stronger, thereby causing a leading edge bubble and hence
transition to form sooner. This approach was taken.
   Figure 65 shows the resulting S6077/9 designs (S6078 is omitted) that have stronger
suction peaks as compared with the prior series. A secondary purpose of this final series was
to examine the effects of a change in the pitching moment, which was specified using the
inverse capabilities of PROFOIL. In comparing the velocity distributions shown in Fig. 60
with those in Fig. 65, it is seen that this current series has a more concave velocity distribution
on the forward upper surface to further promote the early formation of a leading edge laminar
separation bubble. This difference is reflected in the shapes of the S6074/6 vs. S6077/9. As
seen in Fig. 67, this change in the velocity distribution is enough to practically eliminate the
stall hysteresis. Finally, the performance is shown in Fig. 68. One feature of using a more
concave distribution is that the α∗-φ curve (not shown) becomes more shallow. As a result,
the laminar separation bubble drag is reduced at the upper corner of the low drag range,
yielding lower drag than the S6074/6 airfoils but also lower maximum lift as a tradeoff.

10     S1223 High Lift Section

Increased payloads, shortened takeoffand landing distances, reduced aircraft noise, and
lowered stall speeds can all be derived from the beneficial effects of improved high-lift airfoil
aerodynamics. It is, therefore, not surprising that the classic problem of high-lift airfoil
design has been and remains a topic of considerable interest.13,42–44 The purpose here is
to present a high-lift airfoil design philosophy for the increasingly important low Reynolds
number regime in which small unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) operate. Only single-element
airfoils are considered here.
   Airfoils for such aircraft typically operate in the Reynolds number range 200,000 to
500,000. For example, U.S. Navy electronic warfare UAVs (e.g., LAURA45 and FLYRT46,47
aircraft) fly at ship-like speeds ranging from 25 to 40 knots with payload requirements
varying from 10 to 25 lbs. The small vehicle size required for efficient shipboard storage
coupled with low flight speeds and demanding payload requirements places great emphasis

                                          14

=== PAGE 15 ===
on high-lift low Reynolds number aerodynamics. A similar-sized aircraft, the hand-launched
Pointer UAV operated by the U.S. Army,48 is used to perform short-range reconnaissance
missions. Moreover, small payload-laden UAVs have been envisioned for missions that involve
atmospheric sampling, border surveillance, forest fire detection/tracking, ship- or aircraft-
wreck survivor search and weather monitoring. In each case, high-lift airfoil performance
can to varying degrees play an important role.
   To place the current work in a proper global context, Fig. 69 presents the maximum lift
characteristics of a number of representative low-speed airfoils taken from various sources
documented in Ref. 1. Although not all of these airfoils were specifically designed for high-
lift, a predictable and anticipated trend emerges—the lower the Reynolds number, the lower
the maximum lift. In particular, in going from a Reynolds number of 1 × 106 to 1 × 105, a
sharp drop in Cl,max is seen in the available data. The lower end of this range is of interest in
the design of small UAVs based on current trends.46 In particular, this section of the notes
focuses on high-lift airfoil design for a Reynolds number of 200,000.
   It should be mentioned that high lift is rarely the only desirable feature of an airfoil.
The airfoil lift-to-drag ratio, endurance parameter, thickness, pitching moment, stall char-
acteristics and sensitivity to roughness are all important factors, among others, that must
each be weighed separately when one considers selecting or designing an airfoil. This study
focuses on those factors most related to enhanced high-lift low Reynolds numbers airfoil
performance.
   Based on an analysis of several high lift sections, Fig. 70 shows the pitching moment
characteristics vs. the type of upper-surface pressure recovery for several airfoils. The FX 63-
137 with its relatively high (negative) pitching moment and convex pressure recovery appears
towards the upper left corner. In contrast, airfoils with a Stratford-like concave pressure
recoveries and low pitching moments, such as the Miley M06-13-128 airfoil,43 appear on the
lower right. Also shown in the Fig. 70 are several trend lines that, together with the moment
and recovery-type information, can be used to deduce a strategy for high-lift low Reynolds
number airfoil design. It should be noted that the figure is used to only illustrate the trends
and qualitative ideas discussed. Thus, it is not intended to be wholly accurate with respect
to the placement of the airfoils. For instance, two airfoils can have the same pitching moment
and similar recovery distributions and hence occupy the same point on the plot, yet these
two airfoils could exhibit different camber, Cl,max and stall characteristics. In the figure,
the airfoils are placed most accurately with respect to the Cl,max and shape of the recovery
distribution.
   One trend depicted in Fig. 70 is that an airfoil typically becomes more cambered when
the pitching moment increases and/or when the recovery becomes less concave and more
convex. Another trend is that the trailing-edge stall becomes more abrupt as the pressure
recovery becomes less convex and more concave. “Stall rate” (as denoted in Fig. 70) refers
to the shape of the lift curve at stall. The FX 63-137 is an example of an airfoil with
a “slow” trailing-edge stall for which the point of turbulent separation slowly progresses
forward as the angle of attack increases. The M06-13-128 is an example of an airfoil that has
a “moderate” trailing-edge stall.1 The lift curve peaks at Cl,max, then falls offmore rapidly
than the FX 63-137 airfoil. This characteristic is indicative of a turbulent separation point
that moves forward more quickly with increasing angle of attack.
   The last trend shown in Fig. 70 is that the maximum lift coefficient increases as the

                                          15

=== PAGE 16 ===
pitching moment increases and as the pressure recovery approaches that of a Stratford dis-
tribution. The FX 63-137 is a good example of increasing the Cl,max primarily through added
pitching moment. In contrast, classic Liebeck-type airfoils49 (such as the M06-13-128) are
good examples of increasing the Cl,max mainly through the use of a Stratford distribution.
   Specifically, the Liebeck high-lift design philosophy10 involves using a Stratford distribu-
tion to recover the most pressure without separation at Cl,max. Since separation is avoided
entirely, the prototypical Liebeck airfoil is one with no aft loading, which yields a low pitching
moment. The M06-13-128 serves as an example of applying the Liebeck design philosophy
at low Reynolds numbers. Although the M06-13-128 has a high mid-range bubble drag at
the off-design Reynolds numbers of 300,000, the Cl,max is approximately 1.5. This value for
Cl,max is high, especially in light of the intrinsic low pitching moment.
   It is discussed by Eppler13 that to achieve maximum lift on an airfoil with a concave
Stratford-like recovery the low pitching-moment constraint should be relaxed. In a compu-
tational study for Reynolds numbers above 1 × 106, Eppler showed that the lift of an airfoil
with a concave recovery can be increased through the use of aft loading. The airfoils in-
corporated the favorable effects of both a concave recovery distribution and added pitching
moment to achieve high Cl,max values. In Fig. 70, airfoils of this type would appear between
the FX 63-137 and M06-13-128, but displaced in the direction of increased lift.
   As further discussed in Ref. 1, these considerations and others were used to design an
airfoil with Cl,max greater than 2 for a Reynolds number of 200,000. Figure 71 shows the
inviscid velocity distributions predicted by the Eppler code12 for the S1223 for Cl = 1.95.
Through the use of PROFOIL, the upper-surface velocity distribution corresponding to the
design Cl,max was determined from a specified boundary-layer development. In particular,
from the leading edge to near 0.20c, the boundary layer was prescribed to be near laminar
separation, an approach that could be considered as a “laminar analogy” to the turbulent
Stratford pressure recovery.50,51 At 0.20c, a short bubble ramp was employed. The main
pressure recovery was prescribed by specifying the turbulent boundary layer to be increas-
ingly near turbulent separation toward the trailing edge. Finally, aft loading was employed
at the trailing edge since, as discussed, the penalty due to limited trailing-edge separation is
expected to be more than offset by the gain in Cl,max.
   Measured lift characteristics for a Reynolds number of 200,000 are shown in Fig. 72. The
results indicate a Cl,max of approximately 2.2, which clearly validates the aforementioned
design philosophy. As compared with the Cl,max of 1.75 for the FX 63-137, a Cl,max of 2.2 for
the S1223 represents a 25% increase. It should be noted that the S1223 exhibits acceptable
moderate stall characteristics much like the M06-13-128. This characteristic is important for
some UAVs that operate with the airfoil near Cl,max to achieve low-speed flight requirements
for loiter, cruise or landing.
   In an effort to increase the Cl,max of the S1223, it was tested with vortex generators
(VGs) located on the upper surface at 0.17c and, separately, with a 0.01c Gurney flap.1 The
VGs produced a Cl,max of 2.3 for increasing angles of attack followed by an abrupt stall and
a hysteresis loop. Thus, the VGs as tested were not beneficial. The lift performance with
the Gurney flap yielded a Cl,max of 2.3, and the stall was much like that of the clean airfoil.
   Drag data was taken on the S1223 and is shown in Fig. 73. When the drag coefficient
exceeded approximately 0.05, no further data was taken since the airfoil was partially stalled
in which case the accuracy of the wake rake measurements are suspect. As compared with the

                                          16

=== PAGE 17 ===
FX 63-137, the S1223 has higher drag, which is an expected tradeofffor such high maximum
lift coefficients.

11     SA703x Series for Thermal Duration Sailplanes

This last example presents a series of airfoils for application to radio controlled (R/C) model
aircraft, specifically R/C soaring. The interest in designing such a series was motivated by
the results of a survey at the 1996 AMA Nationals/Unlimited Thermal Soaring Category
that showed of the 101 responses (from nearly all of the participants) 40 of the pilots used
the SD7037 airfoil31 shown in Fig. 74 together with its inviscid velocity distribution. Two
other airfoils (S3021 and RG15) each numbered 8 in use, followed by the fourth (SD7080)
with 6, and then 24 different airfoils were used on the remainder. Despite the overwhelming
popularity of the SD7037, it was obvious that this airfoil could not be the optimum for a wide
range of sailplanes with different sizes, wing loadings and weather conditions. For example,
in some situations pilots would benefit by having a faster version of the SD7037 (lower lift),
and in others a slower version (higher lift) might be preferable. Thus, the SD7037 became
the baseline for this series.
   For the series, the objective was to produce a range of similar performing airfoils that
differed with respect to their lift range. One approach would be to make simple camber
changes to the SD7037 to arrive at the new airfoils, but this process was not used because it
is more attractive to control the performance by using the inverse capabilities in PROFOIL.
In particular, PROFOIL was used to set the lower corner of the polar by specifying that
the laminar boundary layer on the lower surface be close to separating at the lift coefficient
at the lower corner of the polar. The shape of the polar above this lift coefficient was then
obtained by tailoring the upper surface transition ramp as was discussed (see Fig. 42).
   Figure 75 shows the particular laminar boundary-layer development prescribed for the
lower corner of the polar. This boundary-layer shape parameter H12 distribution, which is
close to laminar separation, was specified to be achieved at the design angles of attack of
1.75, 2.15, 2.55 and 2.95 deg relative to the zero-lift line to produce each respective airfoil
of the SA703x series shown in Fig. 76. (The SA7037 mimics the baseline SD7037.) In the
figure, the velocity distributions are plotted at angle of attack increments equal to those
that separate the aforementioned lower surface design angles of attack. The corresponding
boundary-layer shape parameter developments as predicted by XFOIL for the lower surface
design condition are shown in Fig. 77, and they are practically identical to the prescription
shown in Fig. 75. It is worth noting that the laminar boundary-layer H12 developments are
plotted for a Reynolds number of 200,000; however, the laminar development to transition
is independent of the Reynolds number as discussed in Ref. 13.
   When each airfoil is operated below the respective design angle of attack for the lower sur-
face, laminar separation and subsequent transition in the laminar separation bubble quickly
move forward and lead to higher drag at the end of the low drag range. This result is found
in the predictions of XFOIL shown in Fig. 78 and validated by the wind tunnel test results
shown in Fig. 79. (In place of the SA7037, the baseline SD7037 was tested.) Additional data
for these airfoils over the Reynolds number range from 100,000 to 300,000 can be found in
Ref. 17, and tabulated data is available from the web.37

                                          17

=== PAGE 18 ===
12     Conclusions

In these lecture notes, an approach to the design of low Reynolds number airfoils was de-
scribed. The power of modern computational tools for low Reynolds number airfoil design
and analysis was discussed with several examples illustrating the overall approach. Emphasis
was placed on the design of the airfoils based on boundary-layer considerations related to
the laminar separation bubble and transition. More specifically, the parameterization of the
design problem centered around prescribing desirable boundary-layer features through an
inverse method. Formulating the design problem in this way offers the designer considerably
more power than one would otherwise have using more traditional methods of inverse design
(based on a single-point velocity distribution) and design by geometric perturbation. The
design approach and philosophy can be used successfully to assess design trade-offs with
a high degree of control. Finally, wind-tunnel testing of low Reynolds number airfoils is,
however, still needed to provide engineers with a necessary level of confidence required to
make important engineering decisions.

References

 [1] Guglielmo, J. J. and Selig, M. S., “High-Lift Low Reynolds Number Airfoil Design,”
    Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 34, No. 1, January–February 1997, pp. 72–79.

 [2] Selig, M. S., Gopalaratham, A., Gigu ́ere, P., and Lyon, C. A., “Systematic Airfoil Design
    Studies at Low Reynolds Numbers,” Fixed and Flapping Wing Aerodynamics for Micro
    Air Vehicle Applications, edited by T. J. Mueller, Vol. 195 of Progress in Astronautics
    and Aeronautics Series, AIAA, New York, 2001, pp. 143–167.

 [3] McGranahan, B. H. and Selig, M. S., “Surface Oil Flow Measurements on Several Airfoils
    at Low Reynolds Numbers,” AIAA Paper 2003–4067, June 2003.

 [4] Selig, M. S. and McGranahan, B. D., “Wind Tunnel Aerodynamic Tests of Six Airfoils
    for Use on Small Wind Turbines,” AIAA Paper 2004–1188, January 2004.

 [5] Mueller, T. J., “Low Reynolds Number Vehicles,” AGARDograph 288, February 1985.

 [6] Mueller, T. J., editor, Proceedings of the Conference on Low Reynolds Number Airfoil
    Aerodynamics, UNDAS-CP-77B123. University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, June
    1985.

 [7] Aerodynamics at Low Reynolds Numbers 104 < Re < 106 International Conference,
    The Royal Aeronautical Society, sponsored by U.S. Office of Naval Research. London
    Branch, October 1986.

 [8] Mueller, T. J., editor, Low Reynolds Number Aerodynamics, Vol. 54 of Lecture Notes in
    Engineering. Springer-Verlag, New York, June 1989.

 [9] Mueller, T. J., editor, Fixed and Flapping Wing Aerodynamics for Micro Air Vehicle
    Applications, Vol. 195 of Progress in Astronautics and Aeronautics Series. AIAA, New
    York, 2001.

                                         18

=== PAGE 19 ===
[10] Selig, M. S. and Maughmer, M. D., “A Multi-Point Inverse Airfoil Design Method Based
    on Conformal Mapping,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 30, No. 5, May 1992, pp. 1162–1170.

[11] Selig, M. S. and Maughmer, M. D., “Generalized Multipoint Inverse Airfoil Design,”
    AIAA Journal, Vol. 30, No. 11, November 1992, pp. 2618–2625.

[12] Eppler, R. and Somers, D. M., “A Computer Program for the Design and Analysis of
    Low-Speed Airfoils,” NASA TM 80210, August 1980.

[13] Eppler, R., Airfoil Design and Data, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1990.

[14] Drela, M., “XFOIL: An Analysis and Design System for Low Reynolds Number Airfoils,”
    Low Reynolds Number Aerodynamics, edited by T. J. Mueller, Vol. 54 of Lecture Notes
    in Engineering, Springer-Verlag, New York, June 1989, pp. 1–12.

[15] Drela, M., “Low Reynolds-Number Airfoil Design for the M.I.T. Daedalus Prototype:
    A Case Study,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 25, No. 8, August 1988, pp. 724–732.

[16] Selig, M. S., Guglielmo, J. J., Broeren, A. P., and Gigu`ere, P., Summary of Low-Speed
    Airfoil Data, Vol. 1, SoarTech Publications, Virginia Beach, Virginia, 1995.

[17] Lyon, C. A., Broeren, A. P., Gigu`ere, P., Gopalarathnam, A., and Selig, M. S., Summary
    of Low-Speed Airfoil Data, Vol. 3, SoarTech Publications, Virginia Beach, Virginia,
    1998.

[18] Guglielmo, J. J. and Selig, M. S., “Spanwise Variations in Profile Drag for Airfoils
    at Low Reynolds Numbers,” Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 33, No. 4, July–August 1996,
    pp. 699–707.

[19] Evangelista, R., McGhee, R. J., and Walker, B. S., “Correlation of Theory to Wind-
    Tunnel Data at Reynolds Numbers below 500,000,” Low Reynolds Number Aerodynam-
    ics, edited by T. J. Mueller, Vol. 54 of Lecture Notes in Engineering, Springer-Verlag,
    New York, June 1989, pp. 131–145.

[20] McGhee, R. J., Walker, B. S., and Millard, B. F., “Experimental Results for the Eppler
    387 Airfoil at Low Reynolds Numbers in the Langley Low-Turbulence Pressure Tunnel,”
    NASA TM 4062, October 1988.

[21] Selig, M. S. and McGranahan, B. D., “Wind Tunnel Aerodynamic Tests on Six Airfoils
    for Use on Small Wind Turbines,” NREL report in preparation, 2004.

[22] Briley, R. W. and McDonald, H., “Numerical Prediction of Incompressible Separation
    Bubbles,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 69, No. 4, 1975, pp. 631–656.

[23] Kwon, O. K. and Pletcher, R. H., “Prediction of Incompressible Separated Boundary
    Layers Including Viscous-Inviscid Interaction,” Transactions of the ASME, Vol. 101,
    December 1979, pp. 466–472.

[24] Davis, R. L. and Carter, J. E., “Analysis of Airfoil Transitional Separation Bubbles,”
    NASA CR-3791, July 1984.

                                          19

=== PAGE 20 ===
[25] Walker, G. J., Subroto, P. H., and Platzer, M. F., “Transition Modeling Effects on
    Viscous/Inviscid Interaction Analysis of Low Reynolds Number Airfoil Flows Involving
    Laminar Separation Bubbles,” ASME Paper 88-GT-32, 1988.

[26] Huebsch, W. W. and Rothmayer, A. P., “The Effects of Small-Scale Surface Roughness
    on Laminar Airfoil-Scale Trailing Edge Separation Bubbles,” AIAA Paper 98-0103,
    January 1998.

[27] Alam, M. and Sandham, N. D., “Direct Numerical Simulation of ‘Short’ Laminar Sep-
    aration Bubbles with Turbulent Reattachment,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 403,
    2000, pp. 223–250.

[28] Lin, J. C. M. and Pauley, L. L., “Low-Reynolds-Number Separation on an Airfoil,”
    AIAA Journal, Vol. 34, No. 8, 1996, pp. 1570–1577.

[29] Wortmann, F. X., “Progress in the Design of Low Drag Airfoils,” Boundary Layer and
    Flow Control, edited by G. V. Lachmann, London, 1961, pp. 748–770.

[30] Selig, M. S., “The Design of Airfoils at Low Reynolds Numbers,” AIAA Paper 85-0074,
    January 1985.

[31] Selig, M. S., Donovan, J. F., and Fraser, D. B., Airfoils at Low Speeds, Soartech 8,
    SoarTech Publications, Virginia Beach, Virginia, 1989.

[32] Donovan, J. F. and Selig, M. S., “Low Reynolds Number Airfoil Design and Wind
    Tunnel Testing at Princeton University,” Low Reynolds Number Aerodynamics, edited
    by T. J. Mueller, Vol. 54 of Lecture Notes in Engineering, Springer-Verlag, New York,
    June 1989, pp. 39–57.

[33] Hama, F. R., “An Efficient Tripping Devices,” Journal of the Aeronautical Sciences,
    Vol. 24, March 1957, pp. 236–237.

[34] Eppler, R., “Direkte Berechnung von Tragfl ̈ugelprofilen aus der Druckverteilung,”
    Ingenieur-Archive, Vol. 25, No. 1, 1957, pp. 32–37, (translated as “Direct Calculation
    of Airfoil from Pressure Distribution,” NASA TT F-15, 417, 1974).

[35] Eppler, R., “Ergebnisse gemeinsamer Anwendung vo Grenzschicht- und Potentialtheo-
    rie,” Zeitschrift f ̈ur Flugwissenschaften, Vol. 8, No. 9, 1960, pp. 247–260, (translated as
    “Results of the Combined Application of Boundary Layer and Profile Theory,” NASA
    TT F-15, 416, March 1974).

[36] Selig, M. S., Multi-Point Inverse Design of Isolated Airfoils and Airfoils in Cascade in
    Incompressible Flow, Ph.D. thesis, The Pennsylvania State University, College Park,
    Pennsylvania, May 1992.

[37] Selig, M. S., UIUC Applied Aerodynamics Group, PROFOIL—Airfoil Design System,
    http://www.profoil.org, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign.

[38] Gopalarathnam, A. and Selig, M. S., “Low Speed NLF Airfoils: A Case Study in Inverse
    Airfoil Design,” AIAA Paper 99-0399, January 1999.

                                          20

=== PAGE 21 ===
[39] Selig, M. S., Lyon, C. A., Gigu`ere, P., Ninham, C. N., and Guglielmo, J. J., Summary of
    Low-Speed Airfoil Data, Vol. 2, SoarTech Publications, Virginia Beach, Virginia, 1996.

[40] Selig, M. S., The Design of Airfoils at Low Reynolds Numbers, Soartech 3, SoarTech
    Publications, Virginia Beach, Virginia, July 1984.

[41] Gigu`ere, P. and Selig, M. S., “New Airfoils for Small Horizontal Axis Wind Turbines,”
    ASME Journal of Solar Energy Engineering, Vol. 120, May 1998, pp. 108–114.

[42] Liebeck, R. H. and I., A., “Optimization of Airfoils for Maximum Lift,” Journal of
    Aircraft, Vol. 7, No. 5, May 1970, pp. 409–415.

[43] Miley, S. J., “On the Design of Airfoils for Low Reynolds Numbers,” AIAA/MIT/SSA
    2nd International Symposium of the Technology and Science of Low-Speed and Motorless
    Flight, Soaring Society of America, Los Angeles, CA, 1974, pp. 82–96, also AIAA Paper
    74-1017, Sept 1974.

[44] Wortmann, F. X., “The Quest for High Lift,” AIAA/MIT/SSA 2nd International Sym-
    posium of the Technology and Science of Low-Speed and Motorless Flight, Soaring So-
    ciety of America, Los Angeles, CA, 1974, pp. 97–101, also AIAA Paper 74-1018, Sept
    1974.

[45] Foch, J. R. and Toot, P. L., “Flight Testing Navy Low Reynolds Number (LRN) Un-
    manned Aircraft,” Low Reynolds Number Aerodynamics, edited by T. J. Mueller, Vol. 54
    of Lecture Notes in Engineering, Springer-Verlag, New York, June 1989, pp. 407–417.

[46] Foch, R. J. and Ailinger, K. G., “Low Reynolds Number, Long Endurance Aircraft
    Design,” AIAA Paper 92–1263, February 1992.

[47] Bovais, C. and Toot, P. L., “Flight Testing the Flying Radar Target (FLYRT),” AIAA
    Paper 94–2144, June 1994.

[48] Karch, L. G., “Very Low Cost UAVs: Why We Need Them, What More We Need to
    Do,” Marine Corps Gazette, March 1991, pp. 54–57.

[49] Liebeck, R. H., “Design of Subsonic Airfoils for High Lift,” Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 15,
    No. 9, 1978, pp. 547–561.

[50] Drela, M. and Giles, M. B., “Viscous-Inviscid Analysis of Transonic and Low Reynolds
    Number Airfoils,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 25, No. 10, October 1987, pp. 1347–1355.

[51] Somers, D. M., “Subsonic Natural-Laminar-Flow Airfoils,” Natural Laminar Flow and
    Laminar Flow Control, edited by R. W. Barnwell and M. Y. Hussaini, Springer-Verlag,
    New York, 1992, pp. 143–176.

                                         21

=== PAGE 22 ===
         (a) Direct design methods                     (b) Inverse method via velocity distributions

(c) Inverse viscous design (H12 shown in con-          (d) Optimization methods that optimize per-
ceptual example)                                       formance

                       Figure 1: Various approaches to airfoil design.

                                               22

=== PAGE 23 | img ===
                                             Figure 4: Smoke flow visualization of a lam-
                                             inar separation bubble on the E387 airfoil
                                             at a Re = 100,000, α = 2 deg. (Photo cour-
                                             tesy of Prof. T.J. Mueller and G. M.Cole,
Figure 2: Design variables that should be    University of Notre Dame, 1990.)
considered: velocity distribution, boundary
layer developments, airfoil geometry, and
performance.

Figure 3: Multipoint design considerations
in connection with the desired airfoil perfor-  Figure 5: Effect of transition location on
mance and corresponding velocity distribu-   bubble size and drag increment (adapted
tion that gives rise to that performance.    from Drela15).

                                         23

=== PAGE 24 | img ===
Figure 6: UIUC 3×4 ft low-speed subsonic
wind tunnel.
                                                                                       Figure 8: Photograph of the UIUC 3×4 ft
                                                                                       low-speed subsonic wind tunnel test sec-
                                                                                       tion.

                                                                                                             Average Turbulence Intensity (Empty Test Section)
                                                                                         0.25
                                                                                       (%)        DC Coupled
                                                                                                  HPF = 0.1Hz
                                                                                       Intensity 0.2  HPF = 3Hz
                                                                                                  HPF = 10Hz
                                                                                         0.15
                                                                                       Turbulence
                                                                                          0.1
                                                                                       Mean
                                                                                         0.05 100,000      200,000          300,000         400,000          500,000
                                                                                                                        Reynolds Number
                                                                                                            Average Turbulence Intensity (Test Apparatus Installed)
                                                                                         0.25
                                                                                       (%)        DC Coupled
                                                                                                  HPF = 0.1Hz
                                                                                       Intensity 0.2  HPF = 3Hz
                                                                                                  HPF = 10Hz
                                                                                         0.15
                                                                                       Turbulence
                                                                                          0.1
                                                                                       Mean
                                                                                         0.05 100,000      200,000          300,000         400,000          500,000
                                                                                                                        Reynolds Number

Figure 7:          Experimental setup with Plexi-                                      Figure 9:           Turbulence intensity at tunnel
glass splitter plates and traverse enclosure                                           centerline, empty test section and with rig
box not shown for clarity.                                                             in place.

                                                                                24

=== PAGE 25 | img ===
Figure 10: Representative upper-surface
oil flow visualization on the E387, Re =
300,000, α = 5 deg.

Figure 11: Conceptual illustration of the re-
lationship between the surface oil flow fea-
tures and skin friction distribution in the
region of a laminar separation bubble plot-
ted against the airfoil arc length.

                                           25

=== PAGE 26 ===
                                    (a) Re = 200,000

                                    (b) Re = 350,000

                                    (c) Re = 500,000

Figure 12: Predicted pressure distributions and evidence of a laminar separation bubble on
the E387 airfoil for several Reynolds numbers over a range of angles of attack.

                                          26

=== PAGE 27 ===
                    E387                    Re = 200,000                                              E387                   Re = 500,000
                    UIUC                                                                              UIUC
                                        Laminar separation                                                               Laminar separation
                                        Oil accumulation                                                                 Oil accumulation
                                        Reattachment                                                                     Reattachment
                                        Natural transition                                                               Natural transition
                                        Turbulent separation                                                             Turbulent separation
               18                                                                                18
               16                                                                                16
               14                                                                                14
               12                                                                                12
               10                                                                                10
        α (deg)                                                                           α (deg)
                8                                                                                 8
                6                                                                                 6
                4                                                                                 4
                2                                                                                 2
                0                                                                                 0
               −2                                                                                −2
                 0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9     1                                     0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9    1
                                      x/c                                                                               x/c

Figure 13: Locations of the upper surface                                        Figure 15: Locations of the upper surface
flow features for the E387 airfoil at Re =                                        flow features for the E387 airfoil at Re =

200,000.                                                                         500,000.

                                                                                                      E387 E387 E387 (E) (E) (E)
                                                                                                      200k 350k 500k
                                                                                                                         Laminar Laminar Laminar separation separation separation
                                                                                                                         Oil Oil Oil accumulation accumulation accumulation
                    E387                    Re = 350,000                                                                 Reattachment Reattachment Reattachment
                    UIUC                                                                                                 Natural Natural Natural transition transition transition
                                        Laminar separation                                                               Turbulent Turbulent Turbulent separation separation separation
                                        Oil accumulation                                         18
                                        Reattachment
                                        Natural transition                                       16
                                        Turbulent separation                                     14
               18
               16                                                                                12
               14                                                                                10
                                                                                          α (deg)
               12                                                                                 8
               10                                                                                 6
        α (deg)                                                                                   4
                8
                6                                                                                 2
                4                                                                                 0
                2                                                                                −2
                                                                                                   0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9    1
                0                                                                                                       x/c

               −2                                                                Figure 16: Locations of the upper surface
                 0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9     1
                                      x/c                                                                                                      Re
                                                                                 flow features for the E387 airfoil for                                =
Figure 14: Locations of the upper surface                                        200,000, 350,000 and 500,000 (‘E’ denotes
flow features for the E387 airfoil at Re =                                        that this is the 5th E387 model in the UIUC

350,000.                                                                         collection).

                                                                          27

=== PAGE 28 ===
                    E387 E387               Re Re = = 200,000 200,000                                 E387 E387              Re Re = = 200,000 200,000
                    UIUC LTPT                                                                         UIUC XFOIL
                                        Laminar Laminar separation separation                                            Laminar Laminar separation separation
                                        Oil Oil accumulation accumulation                                                Transition Transition
                                        Reattachment Reattachment                                                        Oil Oil accumulation accumulation
                                        Natural Natural transition transition                                            Reattachment Reattachment
                                        Turbulent Turbulent separation separation                                        Turbulent Turbulent separation separation
               18                                                                                18
               16                                                                                16
               14                                                                                14
               12                                                                                12
               10                                                                                10
        α (deg)                                                                           α (deg)
                8                                                                                 8
                6                                                                                 6
                4                                                                                 4
                2                                                                                 2
                0                                                                                 0
               −2                                                                                −2
                 0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9     1                                     0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9    1
                                      x/c                                                                               x/c

Figure       17:      Comparison             of    major       E387              Figure        19:      Comparison             of   major        E387
upper-surface flow features between UIUC                                          upper-surface flow features between UIUC
and NASA LTPT for Re = 200,000.                                                  and XFOIL for Re = 200,000.

                    E387 E387               Re Re = = 300,000 300,000                                 E387 E387              Re Re = = 350,000 350,000
                    UIUC LTPT                                                                         UIUC XFOIL
                                        Laminar Laminar separation separation                                            Laminar Laminar separation separation
                                        Oil Oil accumulation accumulation                                                Transition Transition
                                        Reattachment Reattachment                                                        Oil Oil accumulation accumulation
                                        Natural Natural transition transition                                            Reattachment Reattachment
                                        Turbulent Turbulent separation separation                                        Turbulent Turbulent separation separation
               18                                                                                18
               16                                                                                16
               14                                                                                14
               12                                                                                12
               10                                                                                10
        α (deg)                                                                           α (deg)
                8                                                                                 8
                6                                                                                 6
                4                                                                                 4
                2                                                                                 2
                0                                                                                 0
               −2                                                                                −2
                 0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9     1                                     0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9    1
                                      x/c                                                                               x/c

Figure       18:      Comparison             of    major       E387              Figure        20:      Comparison             of   major        E387
upper-surface flow features between UIUC                                          upper-surface flow features between UIUC
and NASA LTPT for Re = 300,000.                                                  and XFOIL for Re = 350,000.

                                                                          28

=== PAGE 29 | img ===
            E387 E387      Re Re = = 500,000 500,000
            UIUC XFOIL
                        Laminar Laminar separation separation
                        Transition Transition
                        Oil Oil accumulation accumulation
                        Reattachment Reattachment
                        Turbulent Turbulent separation separation
         18
         16
         14
         12
         10
     α (deg)
          8
          6
          4                                       Figure 23: Surface oil-flow visualization on
          2
                                                  an airfoil with a zigzag boundary layer tur-
          0
                                                  bulator that promotes rapid transition at
         −2 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
                       x/c                        the trip location.

Figure 21:    Comparison of major E387
upper-surface flow features between UIUC
and XFOIL for Re = 500,000.

                                                  Figure 24: Defining the upper surface tran-
Figure 22:   Conceptual illustration of a         sition ramp as the chordwise extent over
transition ramp on the upper surface of an        which transition moves while the airfoil op-
airfoil.                                          erates in the low drag range of the polar.

                                              29

=== PAGE 30 ===
                                                                              FX 63−137 (B)
                                                                                  Re = 200,000
                                                                                  Re = 350,000
                                                                                  Re = 500,000
                                                                          2.0

                                                                          1.5

                                                                        Cl

                                                                          1.0

                                                                          0.5

                                                                          0.0
Figure 25: Inviscid pressure distributions                                 0.00     0.01     0.02      0.03     0.04     0.05

for the FX 63-137 airfoil.

                                                                    Figure 27: Measured performance for the
                                                                    FX 63-137.

                 FX FX FX 63−137 63−137 63−137 (B) (B) (B)
                 200k 350k 500k
                                 Laminar Laminar Laminar separation separation separation
                                 Transition Transition Transition
                                 Oil Oil Oil accumulation accumulation accumulation
                                 Reattachment Reattachment Reattachment
                                 Turbulent Turbulent Turbulent separation separation separation
             18
             16
             14
             12
             10
       α (deg)
              8
              6
              4
              2
              0
             −2
               0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
                                x/c

Figure 26: Locations of the upper surface
flow features for the FX 63-137 airfoil for                          Figure 28: Inviscid pressure distributions
Re = 200,000, 350,000 and 500,000.                                  for the NASA NLF(1)-0414F airfoil.

                                                              30

=== PAGE 31 ===
                  NASA NASA NASA NLF(1)−0414F NLF(1)−0414F NLF(1)−0414F   1.5
                  200k 350k 500k
                                   Laminar Laminar Laminar separation separation separation
                                   Transition Transition Transition      V/V∞
                                   Oil Oil Oil accumulation accumulation accumulation
                                   Reattachment Reattachment Reattachment
                                   Turbulent Turbulent Turbulent separation separation separation  1.0
             18
             16
             14
                                                                          0.5
             12
                                                                                                Airfoil A, Cl = 0.6
             10                                                                                 Airfoil B,  = 0.6
       α (deg)                                                                                           Cl
              8
                                                                           0
              6
                                                                               0                      0.5         x/c          1
              4
              2
              0
             −2
               0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
                                 x/c                                   Figure 31:        Inviscid velocity distributions
                                                                       for airfoils A and B to study the different
Figure 29:         Locations of the upper sur-
                                                                       effects on drag.
face flow features for the NASA NLF(1)-
0414F airfoil for Re = 200,000, 350,000 and
500,000.

         NASA NLF(1)−0414F
             Re = 200,000
             Re = 350,000
             Re = 500,000
    1.5

                                                                                 Airfoil A  XFOIL v6.8
    1.0                                                                          Airfoil B Re = 200,000   Airfoil A       Airfoil B
                                                                          1.5                       1.5             1.5
  Cl
    0.5                                                                   1.0                       1.0             1.0
                                                                         Cl                         Cl              Cl
                                                                          0.5                       0.5             0.5
    0.0
                                                                          0.0                       0.0             0.0
                                                                           0.00   0.01   0.02    0.03  0    0.5  1.0   0   0.5   1.0
                                                                                      Cd                  xs,tr,r/c       xs,tr,r/c
   −0.5
      0.00      0.01      0.02      0.03      0.04      0.05
                               Cd
                                                                       Figure 32: XFOIL predictions for airfoils A
Figure 30: Measured performance for the                                and B to illustrate the effects of changes in
NASA NLF(1)-0414F.                                                     the transition ramp on drag.

                                                                 31

=== PAGE 32 | img ===
  2.0
 V/V∞                 Airfoil A
                      Cl = 0.5, 1.0
  1.5

  1.0
                                                  Figure 35: Conformal mapping of a circle
                                                  to an airfoil.
  0.5

  0
     0               0.5      x/c      1

Figure 33: Inviscid velocity distributions
for airfoil A with the locations of the bubble
marked.

                                                  Figure 36: Definitions of flow speed and an-
                                                  gle on the airfoil.

  2.0
 V/V∞                 Airfoil B
                      Cl = 0.5, 1.0
  1.5

  1.0

  0.5

  0
     0               0.5      x/c      1
                                                  Figure 37: Flowchart of steps taken to ob-
Figure 34: Inviscid velocity distributions        tain the geometry of an airfoil given the
for airfoil B with the locations of the bubble    specified flow velocity (several details omit-
marked.                                           ted).

                                              32

=== PAGE 33 | img ===
                                            Figure 39: Partial velocity distributions
                                            and boundary-layer developments corre-
                                            sponding to the design conditions (R = 1×
                                            106 for the n-development, smax = 2.067).

Figure 38: Specification to be achieved.

                                            Figure 40: Airfoil and velocity distributions
                                            for α = 8, 10 and 15 deg.

                                        33

=== PAGE 34 | img ===
                  1.75 13   Beginning of segment
                            End of segment
                       12
                        11

                           10
  2.0
                               9
 V/V∞                               8
                  1.15
  1.5                 0                  0.25

  1.0
                         αz (deg) design
                                 segment
                           1.59     8
  0.5                      3.34     9
                           5.07     10
                           6.63     11
                           7.41     12
                           8.21     13
   0
      0                  0.5        x/c       1
          9 8 7    6   5   4   3
        10                         2 1
               SA7035
                                              19           Figure 43: Interactive Matlab MFOIL GUI
       17                 18
                                                           for PROFOIL showing the velocity distri-
                                                           bution.
Figure 41: SA7035 inviscid velocity distri-
butions showing the zero pressure-gradient
segments and corresponding design angles
of attack α∗.

      10                          1.5
                        SA7038
  α* (deg)                        Cl
                        SA7037
       5                SA7036
                        SA7035    1.0
       0
                                  0.5
      −5

     −10                          0.0
       180     120     60      0   0.0   0.5   1.0
                 φ (deg)                 xtr/c

Figure 42: Linkage between the α∗-φ and
Cl-xtr curves for the SA703x airfoil series.

                                                      34

=== PAGE 35 | img ===
                                                                10

                                                          α* (deg)

                                                                 5

                                                                 0

                                                                −5

                                                               −10
                                                                 180      120       60        0
                                                                             φ (deg)

                                                     Figure 46: SD7003 airfoil α∗-φ curves for
                                                     control over the Cl-xtr curves.

Figure 44: Interactive Matlab MFOIL GUI
for PROFOIL showing the α∗-φ curve edit
window.

                                                                  SD7003 SD7003   Re Re = = 200,000 200,000
                                                                  UIUC XFOIL
                                                                               Laminar Laminar separation separation
                                                                               Transition Transition
                                                                               Oil Oil accumulation accumulation
                                                                               Reattachment Reattachment
                                                                               Turbulent Turbulent separation separation
                                                               18
                                                               16
                                                               14
                                                               12
                                                               10
                                                           α (deg)
                                                                8
                                                                6
                                                                4
                                                                2
                                                                0
                                                               −2 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
                                                                              x/c
                                                     Figure 47: Comparison of major SD7003
Figure 45: Inviscid pressure distributions           upper-surface flow features between UIUC
for the SD7003 airfoil.                              and XFOIL for Re = 200,000.

                                                 35

=== PAGE 36 ===
                   SD7003 SD7003          Re Re = = 350,000 350,000                      SD7003
                   UIUC XFOIL                                                                Re = 200,000
                                      Laminar Laminar separation separation
                                      Transition Transition                                  Re = 350,000
                                      Oil Oil accumulation accumulation                      Re = 500,000
                                      Reattachment Reattachment                    1.5
                                      Turbulent Turbulent separation separation
               18
               16
                                                                                   1.0
               14
               12                                                                Cl
               10
        α (deg)                                                                    0.5
                8
                6
                4                                                                  0.0
                2
                0
                                                                                  −0.5
               −2                                                                    0.00       0.01       0.02       0.03       0.04       0.05
                 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
                                     x/c                                                                         Cd

Figure      48:      Comparison            of    major       E387             Figure 50:          Measured performance for the
upper-surface flow features between UIUC                                       SD7003.
and XFOIL for Re = 350,000.

                   SD7003 SD7003          Re Re = = 500,000 500,000
                   UIUC XFOIL
                                      Laminar Laminar separation separation
                                      Transition Transition
                                      Oil Oil accumulation accumulation       Figure 51:          Inviscid pressure distributions
                                      Reattachment Reattachment
                                      Turbulent Turbulent separation separation  for the SD2030 airfoil.
               18
               16
               14
               12
               10
        α (deg)
                8
                6
                4
                2
                0
               −2
                 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
                                     x/c

Figure      49:      Comparison            of    major       E387
upper-surface flow features between UIUC                                       Figure       52:       XFOIL         predictions         for     the
and XFOIL for Re = 500,000.
                                                                              SD2030.

                                                                        36

=== PAGE 37 | img ===
                                                           1.5
                                                          V/V∞
                                                           1.0

                                                           0.5              SG6043, αz = 9.0 deg
                                                                            SG6042, αz = 6.5 deg
                                                                            SG6041, αz = 4.0 deg
                                                            0
                                                              0                  0.5       x/c       1

                                                                          SG6043

                                                                          SG6042

                                                                          SG6041

Figure 53: Measured performance for the
SD2030.                                                 Figure 55: SG604x airfoils and inviscid ve-
                                                        locity distributions.

              15
                            SG6043
                            SG6042
              10            SG6041
          α* (deg)
               5

               0

              −5

              −10

              −15
               180     120     60      0
                          φ (deg)

Figure 54: SG604x airfoil series α∗-φ curves            Figure 56:      XFOIL predictions for the
for control over the Cl-xtr curves.                     SG604x airfoil series.

                                                    37

=== PAGE 38 ===
         SG6043                                                                            10
         SG6042
         SG6041    Re = 300,000                                                      α* (deg)                S6074
                                                                                                             S6075
   1.5                            1.5
                                                                                                             S6076
                                                                                            5

   1.0                            1.0
  Cl                              Cl                                                        0
   0.5                            0.5

                                                                                           −5
   0.0                            0.0

  −0.5                           −0.5                                                     −10
     0.00    0.01    0.02     0.03 −10       0       10      20
                  Cd                          α (deg)

                                                                                          −15
Figure 57: Measured performance for the
SG604x airfoil series.
                                                                                          −20

                                                                                          −25
                                                                                            180       120        60         0
                                                                                                          φ (deg)

                                                                         Figure 59:         S6074/5/6 airfoil series α∗-φ

                                                                         curves for control over the Cl-xtr curves.

  110
        Re = 300,000                                    SG6043 (t/c=10%)        LRN1007 (t/c=7.3%)
          SG604x Airfoil Family
  100     Previously existing airfoils
                                                                                     FX 63-137 (t/c=13.6%)

                                SG6042 (t/c=10%)
ratio 90
                                                          SD7032 (t/c=10%)
                                           E387                 GO 417a (t/c=2.9%)
lift-to-drag                            (t/c=9%)
   80                                A18 (t/c=7.3%)                 SG6040 (t/c=16%)
                                          Clark-Y (t/c=11.7%)
              S6062                                                            SD7062 (t/c=14%)
            (t/c=8%)                     SD7037 (t/c=9.2%)
Maximum                      SD6060
   70       SG6041           (t/c=10.4%)     S822 (t/c=16%)
           (t/c=10%)                                          BW-3 (t/c=5%)
                             S7012
              RG15           (t/c=8.8%)        NACA 2414
           (t/c=8.9%)                          (t/c=14%)
   60                                                         S823 (t/c=21%)

   50
     0.5      0.6       0.7       0.8       0.9       1.0       1.1      1.2       1.3       1.4       1.5
                                    Lift coefficient for maximum lift-to-drag ratio

Figure 58: Maximum lift-to-drag ratio ver-
sus the corresponding lift coefficient for the
SG604x airfoil series as compared with sev-
eral previously existing airfoils.

                                                                   38

=== PAGE 39 ===
   2.0                                                                         S6074   Re = 200,000           S6076   Re = 200,000
                                                                               Increasing α                   Increasing α
                                                                               Decreasing α                   Decreasing α
 V/V∞                                                                    1.5                       −0.3 1.5                       −0.3

   1.5                                                                   1.0                       −0.2 1.0                       −0.2
                                                                         Cl                             Cl
                                                                         0.5                       −0.1 0.5                       −0.1
   1.0                                                                                             Cm                             Cm
                                                                         0.0                        0.0 0.0                       0.0

   0.5                                                                  −0.5                        0.1 −0.5                      0.1
                                                                          −10      0      10     20      −10      0      10     20
                         S6074, Cl = 0.6                                            α (deg)                        α (deg)
                         S6076, Cl = 0.6

    0                                                                  Figure 62:         Measured lift curves for the
       0                       0.5         x/c          1              S6074/6 airfoils.
                  S6074

                  S6076

Figure 60: S6074/6 airfoils and inviscid ve-
locity distributions.

                                                                                     A                           A

        S6074
        S6076     Re = 200,000
   1.5                           1.5
                                                                       C                               Cl
                                                                          l
   1.0                           1.0
                                                                                              B                           B
 Cl                             Cl
   0.5                           0.5

   0.0                           0.0                                                    a                               a

  −0.5                          −0.5
    0.00    0.01    0.02    0.03 −10        0      10      20             (a) Clockwise hys-              (b) Counter clock-
                 Cd                          α (deg)
                                                                          teresis loop                    wise hysteresis loop

Figure 61:        Measured drag polars for the                         Figure 63: Two types of hysteresis in lift on
S6074/6 airfoils.                                                      airfoils at low Reynolds numbers.

                                                                 39

=== PAGE 40 | img ===
                                                                                        S6074
                                                                                        S6076
                                                                                        S6077
                                                                                        S6079
                    (a) Flow state A

                                                                    Figure 66:       S6074/6/7/9 airfoils with the
                                                                    thickness magnified to show the small dif-
                                                                    ferences.

                    (b) Flow state B
                                                                            S6077  Re = 200,000          S6079  Re = 200,000
                                                                            Increasing α                 Increasing α
Figure 64: Flow states corresponding to the                                 Decreasing α                 Decreasing α
                                                                      1.5                     −0.3 1.5                      −0.3
upper and lower branches of the hysteresis
loops see in Fig. 63.                                                 1.0                     −0.2 1.0                      −0.2
                                                                     Cl                            Cl
                                                                      0.5                     −0.1 0.5                      −0.1
                                                                                              Cm                            Cm
                                                                      0.0                      0.0 0.0                       0.0

                                                                     −0.5                      0.1 −0.5                      0.1
                                                                       −10     0      10     20     −10      0     10      20
                                                                                α (deg)                       α (deg)

  2.0
                                                                    Figure 67:        Measured lift curves for the
 V/V∞
                                                                    S6077/9 airfoils.
  1.5

  1.0
                                                                            S6077
                                                                            S6079    Re = 200,000
                                                                       1.5                         1.5

  0.5
                                                                       1.0                         1.0
                        S6077, Cl = 0.6
                        S6079, Cl = 0.6                               Cl                           Cl
                                                                       0.5                         0.5
   0
       0                     0.5         x/c         1
                                                                       0.0                         0.0
                 S6077

                                                                      −0.5                        −0.5
                 S6079                                                  0.00    0.01   0.02    0.03 −10       0      10      20
                                                                                    Cd                         α (deg)

Figure 65: S6077/9 airfoils and inviscid ve-                        Figure 68:       Measured drag polars for the
locity distributions.                                               S6077/9 airfoils.

                                                              40

=== PAGE 41 | img ===
                                               Figure 71: Inviscid velocity distributions
                                               for the S1223 airfoil for Cl = 1.95 (invis-
                                               cid).
Figure 69: Maximum lift coefficient of sev-
eral airfoils over a range of Reynolds num-
bers.

Figure 70: Trends in low Reynolds num-
ber airfoil characteristics as functions of the
pitching moment and type of upper-surface      Figure 72: Measured lift characteristics for
pressure recovery distributions.               the S1223 airfoils at Re = 200,000.

                                           41

=== PAGE 42 | img ===
                                                                                                 2 1
                                                                            SA703x
                                                                      17                  18
                                                                  5
                                                                        Critical H12 for laminar separation
                                                                  4
                                                                                         18
                                                                  3   17
                                                              H12
                                                                  2                           H12 prescription
                                                                  1
                                                                  0
                                                                   0                   0.5       x/c        1

                                                            Figure      75:        Lower-surface        laminar
                                                            boundary-layer        development       prescribed
                                                            for the SA703x airfoil series for the lower
                                                            corner of the drag polar.

Figure 73: Measured performance for the
S1223.

                                                              1.5

                                                             V/V∞

  2.0                                                         1.0
                          αz (deg) α (deg)  Cl
 V/V∞                       2.00    5.30   0.24
                            4.00    7.30   0.47
                            6.00    9.30   0.71                                  SA7038, αz = 6.2 deg
  1.5                       8.00   11.30   0.94               0.5                SA7037, αz = 5.8 deg
                           10.00   13.30   1.17                                  SA7036, αz = 5.4 deg
                                    α0l = −3.3 deg                               SA7035,   = 5.0 deg
                                                                                         αz
  1.0                                                          0
                                                                  0                   0.5       x/c        1
                                                                           SA7038
  0.5
                                                                           SA7037

   0
                                                                           SA7036
      0                   0.5       x/c        1

               SD7037                                                      SA7035

Figure 74: SD7037 airfoil and inviscid ve-                  Figure 76: SA703x airfoils and inviscid ve-
locity distributions.                                       locity distributions.

                                                       42

=== PAGE 43 ===
      5                                                                SA7038
            Critical H12 for laminar separation                        SD7037
      4                                                                SA7036
          17                  18                                       SA7035  Re = 200,000
      3                                                           1.5                       1.5
  H12                     development (XFOIL)
      2               H12
                      H12 prescription
      1                                                           1.0                       1.0
      0                                                          Cl                         Cl
       0                    0.5        x/c        1
                                                                  0.5                       0.5

Figure 77: Laminar boundary-layer devel-
                                                                  0.0                       0.0
opment achieved for the SA703x airfoils and
the agreement with the prescription.
                                                                 −0.5                       −0.5
                                                                   0.00   0.01   0.02    0.03 −10     0      10     20
                                                                              Cd                       α (deg)

                                                               Figure 79: Measured performance for the
                                                               SA703x airfoil series.

Figure 78:        XFOIL predictions for the
SA703x airfoil series.

                                                          43
